It is very important that we understand
the concept of financial
leverage well, what it consists of
and, in addition, that we understand
it in an intuitive way.
Before we get into the
financial leverage, let’s see
what leverage is, which you probably
already know.
The leverage rate is the percentage
of debt over the total
of sources or debt plus equity.
Basically, it is how much the
debt weighs, what proportion of
debt to the total of the sources of financing.
The greater leverage,
the greater debt.
Very easy, right?
well is.
What I want to understand is the
financial leverage.
That is, the positive effect
it has on the profitability of
own funds, on the profitability
that we get the shareholders,
if we increase debt.
With higher debt, higher leverage,
higher profitability for
shareholders.
Sometimes it seems a little counterintuitive.
Let us see it with an example.
We will consider a purchase-sale
operation of a home.
The operation is like that.
We bought a house, year zero, the
price is 100,000 euros and the
valuation of the house has
been 10%.
Therefore, a gross surplus of 10,
000 euros has been generated.
We sell for 100, we buy for 100,
we sell for 110, plusvalue of
10,000 euros.
What happens is that we will
compare the operation that two
different people do.
Person A, never made an MBA,
has no financial knowledge
and, in addition, has 100,000
euros in cash.
He decides not to push.
The leverage rate is 0%.
That is, the 100,000 euros are put
out of his pocket.
The person B, who has certain
financial knowledge, regardless
of whether he has the 100,
000 euros in cash or not, decides
to leverage and leverage
90%.
That is, you buy a home that has
a value of 100,000 euros but only
puts 10,000 euros because the other
90,000 euros is a mortgage
loan, for example, which is the
usual thing in the purchase
of a home.
We have a 0% leverage,
a 90% leverage and we will see
what the impact of this is on the
profitability that each one
gets.
The plus-value of the two is the
same, the gross plus-value, because
the two get a plus-value of 10,
000 euros.
They sold the house a year later
for 110,000 euros.
In the case of the person who has not
leveraged, he does not have to pay interest.
and a mortgage.
In the case of the person who has
been leveraged, he has to pay the
interest of that that if we are
saying, for example, we will
assume that it is of a 3% annual,
about 90,000 euros he has to
pay the interest of 2.700 euros.
What is the benefit that one has obtained
and the one that has obtained another?
The person A has obtained a
profit equal to the gross surplus
value of 10,000 euros.
In the case of B, we had
to deduct interest.
We will think, well, that it gets a
profit of 7,300 euros, but here the
important thing, what I want you
to understand, is the effect it
has on the profitability of the
own funds, that is, the capital
they have contributed each of
them.
The first has obtained
a profit of 10,000 euros on
a capital, on a own fund of
100,000.
What is its profitability?
The ROE is 10%.
In case B, it has obtained
a smaller profit, because it had
to pay the interests of the debt,
but it is that the capital provided
is 10,000 euros, so the ROE
is 73%.
As we see, this is the
financial leverage, it is the
positive effect that has the
increase of debt on profitability
to own funds, but look, I want
to make a very important
mating, because this is
not always so.
For a positive financial
leverage to occur, for
the effect to be positive
on profitability, a condition
must be obtained.
One condition is the following, and
it is that you are borrowed money and
that money has a cost, which is those
interests.
Well, you have to be able to
get with that money a profitability
higher than the cost of that debt,
because if you are borrowed
money at a cost of 2 and you
get a profitability of 1, you
will lose money.
There is no positive financial
leverage, right?
Let us see it with the same example.
It is the same operation, which
happens that in this case,
instead of a revaluation of 10%,
a revaluation of 2% annually
occurs.
And we go to the bottom, in the case
of which it has not been leveraged,
well, because it gets a
plusvalue of 2,000 euros.
In the case of what has been
leveraged, here you are doing a
bad business, because you
are getting a profitability
of 2%, however, the cost of those
funds generates interest that
is paying interest of 2,700
euros, therefore, you are
losing money.
In short, if you are able to
get a higher profitability than
the cost of that debt, yes,
you have more debt, you get a
higher return on the investment,
which is the financial
leverage.
If, on the other hand, the return you
are getting on your investment is lower
than the cost of debt, it is better,
obviously, that you have no debt.